\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename classy.info
@settitle Classy
@c %**end of header
@copying
An application that helps manage a cluster of Erlang nodes.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 EMQ Technologies Co., Ltd

The document was typeset with
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/, GNU Texinfo}.

@end copying

@titlepage
@title Classy
@subtitle An application that helps manage a cluster of Erlang nodes.
@author  EMQ Technologies Co., Ltd.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@node Top
@top Classy

  Feature overview:

  @itemize
  @item @emph{Cluster management}:
  sites can join together to form clusters or be removed from the cluster.
  Peer information is propagated using gossip protocol.

  @item @emph{Persistent node identities}:
  nodes are assigned persistent identities that survive host name changes.

  @item @emph{Service discovery}:
  sites can automatically discover one another using one of cluster discovery strategies.

  @item @emph{Automatic clean up}:
  sites that remain down for a long time are automatically removed.

  @item @emph{Persistence layer}:
  classy implements a standalone persistent table similar to mnesia `local_content` `disk_copies` table,
  that can be used by 3rd party applications.

  @item @emph{Unique ID generation}:
  @xref{api/classy/classy_uid, classy_uid}

  @item @emph{Two-Phase Commit}:
  @xref{api/classy/classy_vote, classy_vote}
  @end itemize

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

  @section Concepts
  @cindex Site ID
  @anchor{Site ID}
  @b{Site ID} is a random unique identifier of the node that persists between restarts and host name changes.
  Each node creates this identifier once and then never changes it.

  By default, classy initializes site with a random value.
  Business applications can override this behavior by registering @ref{classy:on_node_init/2} hook
  containing a call to @ref{classy_node:maybe_init_the_site/1}:

  @example erlang
  classy:on_node_init(
    fun() ->
       classy_node:maybe_init_the_site(MySiteId)
    end,
    0)
  @end example

  @cindex Cluster ID
  @anchor{Cluster ID}
  @b{Cluster ID} is a unique random identifier of the cluster.

  Each site starts in its very own cluster with a random ID.
  When a site joins a remote node,
  it inherits its cluster ID of the remote.

  @cindex Run level
  @anchor{Run level}
  @b{Run level} is global system state derived from the configuration and the number of peers.
  It indicates ``readiness'' of the local site.

  @enumerate
    @item @code{stopped}:
    Classy application itself is not running or is not ready.

    @item @code{single}:
    Classy application is ready to process cluster membership information,
    but the number of known peers is less than @ref{n_sites}.

    @item @code{cluster}:
    the number of @emph{known} peers is >= @ref{n_sites},
    but the number of @emph{connected} peers is less than @ref{quorum}.

    @item @code{quorum}:
    the number of connected peers satisfies the configuration.
    Site is fully connected and operational.
  @end enumerate

  @node Network Partition
  @section Network Partitions

  Classy guarantees that all cluster members will eventually converge to the same state,
  but earlier join and leave commands @emph{may} override later commands.

  These adverse side effects can be observed when conflicting commands are issued on different nodes faster than the nodes sync with each other.
  This is most likely to happen during a network partition.

@node Autocluster
@chapter Autocluster

  @cindex Peer discovery
  Autocluster is a mechanism for automatic peer discovery.
  Peer discovery is done with a help of several modules implementing
  @ref{api/classy/classy_discovery_strategy, discovery_strategy} behavior.

  The strategy is configured via @ref{discovery_strategy} OTP application environment variable.
  This variable has a form of 2-tuple with the following elements:

  @enumerate
    @item Discovery method, such as @code{static}
    @item Method-specific parameters
  @end enumerate

  New methods can be registered using @ref{classy_discovery_strategy:hook/2} function.

  Additionally, there is a hook that allows to filter and prioritize discovered nodes:
  @ref{classy:pre_autocluster/2}.

  Autocluster logic runs only on singleton sites.
  It is inactive on sites that already have peers (up or down).

  The following strategies are available:

  @node manual autocluster
  @section manual
    `Manual'' strategy disables automatic peer discovery.
    When it is selected,
    the site simply waits until the operator manually calls @ref{classy:join_node/2}.

    Example configuration:

    @example
    @{manual, []@}
    @end example

  @node static autocluster
  @section static
     Join to one of the nodes explicitly pre-configured in the list.

     Example configuration:

     @example
     @verbatim
     {static, #{seeds => ['foo@example.com', 'bar@example.com']}}
     @end verbatim
     @end example

  @node dns autocluster
  @section dns
    Discover peers via DNS query.

    Configuration parameters:

    @table @code
      @item name
      Domain name (Required)
      @item type
      type of the DNS record (default: A).

      Allowed values: @code{A}, @code{AAAA}, @code{SRV}.
      @item app
      Node name prefix (default: @ref{classy_autocluster:app_name/0})
    @end table

    Node names are derived using the following template @code{App@@Hostname},
    where @code{App} is the value of @code{app} configuration option,
    and @code{Hostname} is derived from the DNS response.

    When @code{a} or @code{aaaa} type is used, host names become IP addresses.
    It's recommended to use SRV records.

  @node k8s autocluster
  @section k8s

    This discovery strategy relies on Kubernetes API server.
    It queries the Kubernetes API endpoint @code{/api/v1/namespaces/@{namespace@}/endpoints/@{app@}}
    to retrieve the IP addresses or hostnames of all pods associated with that service,
    which are then converted into Erlang node names.

    Configuration Parameters:
    @table @code
      @item apiserver
      Type: string (Required)

      The URL of the Kubernetes API server.

      @item service_name
      Type: string (Required)

      The name of the Kubernetes Service used for discovery.

      @item app_name
      Type: string, default: @ref{classy_autocluster:app_name/0}.

      The application name used as a prefix for the generated node names.

      @item address_type
      Type: Atom, default: @code{ip}.

      Determines the address extraction and node naming format.
      Supported values: @code{ip}, @code{hostname}, @code{dns}.

      @item namespace
      Type: string, default: @code{"default"}

      The Kubernetes namespace where the service is located.

      @item suffix
      Type: string, default: @code{""}

      An optional DNS suffix appended to the node name.
    @end table

  @node etcd autocluster
  @section etcd

    Discover peers by querying ETCD service.

    Configuration parameters:

    @table @code
      @item endpoints
      Type: @code{[string()]} (Required).

      List of etcd endpoints to connect to.

      @item prefix
      Type: String (Required).

      Key prefix to use for service discovery
    @end table

@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration

  @code{classy} is configured via OTP application environment variables and callbacks.

@macro defenv{NAME, TYPE}
@anchor{\NAME\}
@unnumberedsubsec \NAME\
@vindex \NAME\
@emph{Type}: \TYPE\
@end macro

@macro defen{NAME, TYPE, DEFAULT}
@defenv{\NAME\, \TYPE\}

@emph{Default}: \DEFAULT\
@end macro

  @section General
    @defenv{setup_hooks, @ref{t:classy_lib:mfargs/0,mfargs()}}

      A callback that classy executes during startup.
      It allows business applications to set up other hooks using a more type-safe API.

    @defen{table_dir, @code{file:filename()}, @code{"."}}

      Directory where persistent data is stored.
      It should be writable.

    @defen{rpc_timeout, @code{timeout()}, 5000}

      @emph{Unit}: ms

      Default timeout for remote procedure calls.
  @section Peer

    @defen{sync_timeout, @code{non_neg_integer()}, 1000}

      @emph{Unit}: ms

      Maximum interval of time that can pass between the membership CRDT server receiving an update
      and the moment it propagates it to the peers.

    @defen{n_sites, @code{pos_integer()}, 1}

      Minimum number of known peers necessary to advance @ref{t:classy:run_level/0,run level}
      from @code{single} to @code{cluster}.

    @defen{quorum, @code{pos_integer()}, 1}

      Minimum number of known peers necessary to advance @ref{t:classy:run_level/0,run level}
      from @code{cluster} to @code{quorum}.

  @section Two-phase commit
    @defen{vote_retry_interval, @code{pos_integer()}, 5000}

      @emph{Unit}: ms

      2PC coordinator re-sends outcome of a transaction to the participants at this interval.

  @section Autoclean
    @defen{max_site_downtime, @code{pos_integer() | infinity}, @code{infinity}}

      @emph{Unit}: s.

      Automatically kick sites that have been down longer than this value from the cluster.

      Note: to prevent network-isolated nodes from kicking their peers,
      quorum among the running nodes is required to perform the act.

    @defen{cleanup_check_interval, @code{pos_integer()}, 30_000}

      @emph{Unit}: ms.

      Autoclean check interval.

    @defen{forget_after, @code{pos_integer()}, 1w}

      @emph{Unit}: s

      Forget information about inactive (kicked) sites after this period of time.

      Note: cleanup procedure may lead to the following situation:

      @enumerate
      @item Site A goes down
      @item Site B kicks A
      @item Information about event 2 propagates throughout the cluster.
      @item Cleanup. All active peers delete data about A.
      @item A goes back up
      @end enumerate

      Since at step 4 we removed the data about event 2, A will reappear in the cluster.

      So @code{forget_after} should be set to a fairly large value to make sure it doesn't cover nodes that can go back online.

  @section Autocluster
    @defen{discovery_interval, @code{pos_integer()}, 5_000}

      @emph{Unit}: ms.

      Peer discovery retry interval.

    @defenv{discovery_strategy, @ref{t:classy_discovery_strategy:t/0, classy_discovery_strategy:t/0}}

      Peer discovery method, @xref{Autocluster}.

@node API Reference
@chapter API Reference
@include _anvl_build/doc/classy/app.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex tp cp
@printindex cp

@bye
